About Lois Lowry

“From the time I was eight or nine, I
wanted to be a writer. Writing was
what I liked best in school; it was what
I did best in school.”

—Lois Lowry

L ois Lowry says that, aside from photography, she has never

wanted to do anything but write. The author of more than

twenty-ﬁve books for children and young adults, Lowry developed
a love of language, and a love of stories, early on. “I was a solitary
child,” she remembers, “born the middle of three, who lived in
the world of books and my own imagination. There are some
children, and I was this kind of child, who are introverts and 
love to read—who prefer to curl up with a book than to hang out
with friends or play at the ball ﬁeld. Children like that begin to
develop a feeling for language and for story. And that was true 
for me—that’s how I became a writer.”

Lois Lowry was born on March 20, 1937, to Katharine and
Robert Hammersberg. Her sister, Helen, was three when Lois was
born; her brother, Jon, was born six years after Lois.

5

Lowry’s father was an army dentist, and his military career led
the family all over the world. Lois was born in Honolulu, Hawaii,
where she lived until she was three. Then the family moved to
New York City for two years. When Robert Hammersberg was
sent overseas during World War II, Lois, her mother, and her
sister went to stay with her mother’s parents at their home in
Carlisle, Pennsylvania. That’s where her brother was born. Seven
years later, the family went to join her father in Tokyo, Japan,
where he was stationed. They lived there for three years before
returning to the United States and New York City, where Lowry
went to high school.

After high school, Lowry went to Brown University in Providence,
Rhode Island, but left after her sophomore year to get married.
Since her husband was a naval ofﬁcer, Lowry continued making
the frequent moves required of military families. Over the next
six years, she lived in California, Connecticut, Florida, South
Carolina, and Massachusetts. In the early 1960s, with four
children under the age of ﬁve, Lowry and her husband moved to
Maine to raise their family.

“My children grew up in Maine,” Lowry says. “So did I. I . . . ﬁnally
began to write professionally, the thing I had dreamed of doing
since those childhood years when I had endlessly scribbled
stories and poems in notebooks.”

Lowry went back to college in Maine. She got her degree from the
University of Southern Maine in 1973, and went to graduate
school. In 1976, she discovered her chosen career: writing for
children. “Since childhood, I always wanted to be a writer,” Lowry

6

says. “I majored in writing in college, but I thought of myself as a
writer for adults. It wasn’t until I wrote my ﬁrst book for kids in
1976 that I realized it was something that I loved doing. Now I
hardly ever write for adults.”

Lowry has written about many topics, some autobiographical,
others not. Her ﬁrst book, A Summer to Die, is about the death of
an older sibling. She wrote the novel from personal experience:
She lost her own sister to cancer in 1962. But whether or not the
topics are based on her own experience, the feelings are. “Every
time I write a book, I feel all the same feelings I felt when I was
nine,” Lowry has said.

While she may express the feelings of a nine-year-old in her
writing, Lowry expresses the concerns of a grown woman. “I have
grandchildren now,” she says. “For them, I feel a greater urgency
to do what I can to convey the knowledge that we live intertwined
on this planet and that our future as human beings depends
upon our caring more, and doing more, for one another.”

Books, Lowry says, are one way to understand this
interconnectedness. “The man that I named The Giver passed
along to the boy knowledge, history, memories, color, pain,
laughter, love, and truth. Every time you place a book in the
hands of a child, you do the same thing. . . . Each time a child
opens a book, he pushes open the gate that separates him from
Elsewhere. It gives him choices, it gives him freedom.”

Lowry sits at her desk every day, typing and retyping, putting
together stories that open the gate to Elsewhere. “I have a

7

relationship with—and an obligation to—the reader,” she says,
“because I affect that person’s life and thinking, and that is no
small responsibility.”

In addition to doing the writing that she loves, Lowry ﬁnds time
for a number of other activities. She is an avid reader. “Sitting
around eating fresh apricots and reading a good book is my idea
of heaven,” Lowry says, adding that this was one of her favorite
activities when she was ten, too. She also loves gardening—she
has two houses with ﬂower gardens—and cooking. She knits for
her children and grandchildren, and likes to play bridge and go
to the movies. And, she is an accomplished photographer; her
work graces the covers of her books The Giver, Number the Stars,
and Gathering Blue. 

Lowry now lives in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and spends her
weekends at a farmhouse in New Hampshire with a Tibetan
terrier named Bandit.

8

How The Giver Came About

“We can forget pain. . . . And it is
comfortable to do so. But I also
wonder. . . is it safe to do that, to
forget?”

—Lois Lowry

L ois Lowry describes the origins of The Giver as a river that

began back when she was eleven years old. At the time, her
family lived in Tokyo, Japan, where her father was stationed after
World War II. They lived in a small American community there.
The way Lowry describes it, the fenced-off community shared
some traits with the community in which Jonas lives: It was
comfortable, familiar, and safe.

But, like Jonas after he begins receiving memories, Lowry did not
want comfortable, familiar, and safe. Day after day, she rode her
bicycle out of the gate that closed off her community. She would
ride to an area of Tokyo called Shibuya. Lowry says she loved the
feel of the place, “the vigor and the garish brightness and the
noise: all such a contrast to my own life.” For Lowry, Shibuya
was Elsewhere. The river started there. As she grew, Lowry added
more memories, thoughts, and ideas to this river.

9

She added memories from when she was a freshman in college
and lived in a small dorm of fourteen young women. Thirteen
of the women—Lowry included—were very much alike. They
dressed alike, they acted alike. But the fourteenth woman was
different. Lowry remembers that she and her roommates didn’t
“tease or torment” the woman who was different, but did
“something worse”: They ignored her, pretending that she didn’t
exist. “Somehow by shutting her out, we make ourselves feel
comfortable. Familiar. Safe,” Lowry says.

These memories, as well as the remorseful thoughts that
followed, ﬂowed into the river.

The river rose when Lowry was sent by a magazine editor to
interview a painter who lived alone off the coast of Maine. She
and the man talked a lot about color. “It is clear to me that
although I am a highly visual person—a person who sees and
appreciates form and composition and color—this man’s capacity
for seeing color goes far beyond mine,” Lowry says. She adds that
she wished “that he could have somehow magically given me the
capacity to see the way he did.”

Lowry photographed the man and kept a copy of the photograph,
because there was something about his eyes that haunted her.
(This photograph is now on the cover of The Giver.) The artist
later went blind, though he said he could still see ﬂowers in his
memory. “Doesn’t that make you think of The Giver?” Lowry
asks.

10

Over the years, many more memories, thoughts, and ideas were
added to the river. There was the time she heard of a crazed killer
and felt relieved that he was not in her own neighborhood—then,
moments later, felt ashamed to feel such relief. “How safe I
deluded myself into feeling,” she says, “by reducing my own
realm of caring to my own familiar neighborhood.”

Lowry’s experiences with her elderly parents also added to the
river that would become The Giver. “Both of my parents were
dying when I wrote the book,” Lowry says. “So the topic of
memories and the transfer of memories from one generation to
the next was very much on my mind.”

Lowry says that though her mother was quite ill, “her mind was
intact. She wanted to tell me the stories of her past . . . it was her
life she wanted to pass along.”

But her father was losing his memories. During one visit, he
pointed to a picture of Lois’s older sister, Helen, who had died of
cancer when she was just twenty-eight years old. “That’s Helen,”
he’d said. “I can’t remember exactly what happened to her.”

And Lowry thought, We can forget pain. . . . And it is comfortable to
do so. But . . . is it safe to do that, to forget?

It was from this river of memories, thoughts, and ideas that Lois
Lowry wrote The Giver.

11

An Interview with Lois Lowry

About The Giver

Jonas is always careful about language, trying to choose just the
right words. Is he like you in that regard? How important do you
think it is to choose just the right words?

Yes, Jonas is like me in valuing the precision of words. . . . (It’s
part of my job after all, to choose just the right words as I make
my way through the writing of a book.) Though because of the
world in which he lives, he has no feeling for the beauty of
language, or the subtlety it can have.

What do you think is the most appealing aspect about the
community in which Jonas lives? What is the least appealing?

I like the safety and comfort of it: the absence of crime, poverty,
deprivation, prejudice. But the lack of creativity and imagination
is the most troubling aspect to me.

The Giver is one of the American Library Association’s most
frequently challenged books. What do you say to people who want
to remove from library shelves a book that shows just how harmful
lack of choice can be?

12

I sometimes explain to kids, in particular, that people who
challenge books do so because they care about children and their
welfare. The irony, though, if you think it through, is that they
make the world a more dangerous place by taking away freedom.
The people who inhabited the world of The Giver had made their
world very safe, very comfortable. But they had done it by taking
away freedom. And there were no books left.

If a reader took away only one thing from this book, what would
you want it to be?

The thing I hope readers will learn from The Giver is the
importance of having choice, and the importance of making good
choices.

About being a writer

When do you write? Will you describe a typical day for us?

I work at home, in a room that was once a doctor’s ofﬁce (this
house once belonged to a doctor, and his ofﬁce was attached to
the house. I took away all his cabinets and created a wall of
bookcases in their place). I go into my ofﬁce every morning and I
stay here all day, unless, of course, I’m traveling.

I sit here [Lowry answered these interview questions from her
ofﬁce.] at a MacIntosh computer and put words on a page. I am
not always writing ﬁction—though there is always a book-in-
progress in the computer. I have to spend a lot of time answering

13

mail, doing interviews, writing speeches, etc. But the time with
ﬁction is the time I love most. I write sentences, rewrite them, say
them aloud, listen to their cadence, and write them again. I ﬁnd
ways to make them ﬂow into the next sentences and
paragraphs . . . to make the narrative move along smoothly; to
make the characters seem real. Writing is a solitary occupation,
of course, but, for me, never lonely. My head is so populated with
my ﬁctional people, and they become quite real to me.

How do you know when you’re ready to begin writing a new book?

I think about a book for a long time before I begin writing. It’s
only when the character comes alive in my imagination . . . when
I know where in his story I will encounter him or her, in other
words, where the book will begin. By then I know everything that
has gone before. But I don’t want to start too far back. The best
stories begin in the middle of something. In The Giver, for
example . . . I knew, before I began, what Jonas had been doing
for eleven years. But I realized I needed to start on one particular
day when he was almost twelve.

How important is reading to your writing?

Reading is absolutely essential. You don’t enjoy cooking if you’ve
never eaten good food. And why would you write if you didn’t
read, and love reading? For a writer, reading is a constant
education, as well. You learn from poor writers and you are
inspired by great ones.

14

You’ve said that you don’t read children’s books by other authors.
Why not?

I ﬁnd that the ﬁction I most enjoy is ﬁction in which I can relate
to the main character. . . identify with him or her. That means
that I most enjoy ﬁction about people my age, people who face
problems that I have faced, or that I can imagine facing. Of
course, having been a child . . . and because I have a good
memory of my childhood . . . I can enjoy books for kids. But I
have limited time for reading. So I spend it on adult books.

What’s your favorite thing about being a writer? What’s your least
favorite?

I like the solitude of it. I don’t think I’d enjoy a job that required
constant interaction with other people. Least favorite? The
business end of it: contracts, copyrights, etc. Boooorring. But
necessary, of course.

What do you ﬁnd easiest when writing? What do you ﬁnd
hardest?

Hmmmm. Have to think about that one. Easiest, I guess, is
starting and ending. I always ﬁnd the beginnings of manuscripts
an exhilarating time. And I like (even though readers are always
bugging me about the ending of The Giver) the conclusions of
books: ﬁguring out where, exactly, to end, so that everything
important in the book is part of the ending. . . . But at the same
time, I don’t want the ending to be too neatly tied up, because I
want to leave the reader with things to think and wonder about.

15

And that leaves, as the hardest part, the middle. There is so
much to weave in and through the middle. The mechanics of it
are difﬁcult at times.

You are a photographer as well as a writer. How does your
photography inform your writing in general, and how did it inform
your writing of The Giver, in particular? (Aside from the beautiful
cover art.)

As a photographer it is always a question of choosing ﬁlm,
lenses, focus, depth of ﬁeld, etc. And the composition as well. The
same things apply to writing: where to place things, how to focus
in on the important things, what to blur. In addition, as a
writer. . . I tend to SEE what I’m writing; I go about it very
visually.

What advice do you have for children who would like to be
writers? What do you suggest they write about?

Read a lot, of course. And think about what you read. That’s how
you learn what makes stories work. Write for yourself, and to
practice how to put things together on a page. Don’t think for
one second, ever, about “how can I get this published.” Think,
instead, about the beauty of the language: how it feels and ﬂows,
how you can make it say just what you want it to.

What should they write about? The things that trouble them. The
things they fear. The things that bring them the most joy.

16

General

You’ve said you were painfully shy as a child. Are you still shy?
How has your shyness inﬂuenced the stories you write?

Yes, I am [shy], but I have learned to conceal that fairly well and
to make my way through the necessary public events that are
part of my life now. I think being an introvert has made me
introspective. I think a lot, instead of talking a lot. Thinking is a
very important part of being a writer. And so is observation. I am
a watcher of people. It serves me well as a writer.

If you weren’t a writer, what might you be?

Well, I would enjoy being a ﬁlmmaker, I think. Or a designer of
houses. Not an architect—I’m not interested in the engineering
and structural stuff. But I love renovating old houses. Right now
I’m in the middle of ﬁxing up a house built in 1768. There are
paint samples spread out all over my desk.

What’s one thing, besides writing, that you’re really good at?
What’s one thing that you’re really bad at?

I’m a pretty good cook, and I like entertaining friends . . . that goes
along with my love of ﬁxing up houses. I’m a very low-level
Martha Stewart type, I think.

And I am SOOOOOO bad at anything athletic. Bad skier. Terrible
tennis player. I’m a good swimmer, though, so I’m not completely
hopeless.

17

Chapter Charter: 
Questions to Guide Your Reading

T he following questions will help you think about the

important parts of each chapter.

Chapter 1
• What do you imagine it means when someone is “released”?
• What are some clues that Jonas’s community is different from

the one in which you live?

Chapter 2
• How would you feel not to have your own individual birthday?
• If you were attending the Ceremony of Twelve with Jonas, what

Assignment do you think the Elders would select for you?

Chapter 3
• How would you feel to be watched all the time, the way Jonas is?
• Do you think it says something about Jonas that he sees the

apple change?

Chapter 4
• Jonas’s community has a lot of rules. Do you think that’s a

good thing or a bad thing? Why?

Chapter 5
• Why was Jonas embarrassed about telling his dream?

18

• How important is sameness in Jonas’s community? How

important is it in your community?

Chapter 6
• All the members of Jonas’s family had to sign a pledge that

they would not become attached to the newchild, Gabe. Do you
think it’s possible to keep such a promise?

• What do you think of how families in Jonas’s community are

formed?

Chapter 7
• Do you think Asher should have been given the discipline

wand when he was three, for saying “smack” instead of
“snack”?

• How would you feel if you were in Jonas’s shoes and the
Chief Elder skipped right over you when she was making
Assignments?

Chapter 8
• What do you think Jonas’s Capacity to See Beyond is?
• Would you rather be selected, as Jonas was, or assigned, as

his groupmates were?

Chapter 9
• Jonas tells himself several times that things can’t change
between him and his best friend, Asher. Do you think they
can? Do you think they will?

• Why does Jonas ﬁnd the ﬁnal rule in his instructions, “You

may lie,” so unsettling?

19

Chapter 10
• What do you think it means to live in a place where no doors

are ever locked?

• Jonas says, “I thought there was only us. I thought there was

only now.” Do you think that’s a good way to live?

Chapter 11
• Can you imagine giving up such things as snow and hills

because they are impractical?

Chapter 12
• Imagine a world without color. What color would you miss

most?

• What value, if any, is there to Sameness?

Chapter 13
• Do you agree with Jonas that people have to be protected from

wrong choices?

• As Jonas continues his training, he often ﬁnds himself angry

with his groupmates and his family. Why?

• The Giver says that without memories, knowledge is

meaningless. What does he mean?

Chapter 14
• Do you agree that painful memories are made easier when they

are shared?

• Do you think it’s fair that one person in the community—The

Receiver—should have to be burdened and pained by memories
so that no one else is?

20

Chapter 15
• Why do you think The Giver asks Jonas to forgive him? 

Chapter 16
• The Giver gives Jonas many good memories. What are some of

your best memories?

• Do you think the elderly should be part of the community, or

separate, as in Jonas’s community?

• Do you think Jonas’s parents love him? Do you think they

know what love is?

• Do you agree with Jonas that things could be different? How?

Chapter 17
• Why didn’t the game of good guys and bad guys that Jonas’s
friends play seem harmless to Jonas anymore? Should Jonas
have asked them to stop playing it? Why or why not?

Chapter 18
• Do you think Rosemary sounds like she was or wasn’t brave?
• Why did The Giver seem distracted after telling Jonas to stay

away from the river?

Chapter 19
• What do you think of what Jonas’s community calls “release”?

Were you surprised at what it was?

• How do you think this new knowledge will affect Jonas?

21

Chapter 20
• Jonas knows that if his plan fails, he could be killed. But he
believes that if he stays, his life is no longer worth living. Do
you agree?

• Do you think The Giver should go with Jonas or stay? Why?

Chapter 21
• How does Jonas show that he understands that the meaning of

everything is to care about others?

• How do you think The Giver will feel when he realizes Jonas is

gone? How will Jonas’s friends and family feel?

• Why is the community so desperate to get Jonas back?

Chapter 22
• Jonas brieﬂy wonders whether he made the wrong choice when

he decided to run away. What do you think?

Chapter 23
• Although most of the memories have left Jonas, the feelings

have not. Why do you think that is?

• How do you think the story ends?

22

Plot: What’s Happening?

“‘Jonas,’ she said, speaking not to him
alone but to the entire community of
which he was a part, ‘you will be
trained to be our next Receiver of
Memory. We thank you for your
childhood.’”

—Chief Elder, The Giver 

T he Giver is the story of a boy who lives in a seemingly

perfect futuristic world and what he does when he learns

the great price his community pays for such perfection.

The story starts with eleven-year-old Jonas worrying about the
upcoming Ceremony of Twelve. This ceremony is when the
Elevens are given their Assignments. 

One evening before the Ceremony, Jonas’s father, a Nurturer,
brings home a newchild who needs extra nurturing. Jonas’s
father hopes to help the baby, named Gabe, grow and learn to
sleep, so that the Committee will not vote to release him.

The Ceremony holiday ﬁnally arrives. The ﬁrst day begins with
the Naming of the newchildren. Gabe is not at the ceremony;

23

Jonas’s father received permission from the Committee to allow
the newchild an additional year to reach the proper milestones. 

The Ceremony of Twelve begins the next day after lunch. The
Chief Elder makes the Assignments, but skips Jonas when it is
his turn. After she makes the ﬁnal Assignment, the Chief Elder
apologizes to Jonas. Then she says that he has been “selected to
be our next Receiver of Memory.” She says that the Committee
failed in their last selection ten years ago, and has been very
careful with this one. She explains that the job, the most honored
in the community, requires that The Receiver be alone and apart,
and that Jonas will need a tremendous amount of courage
because he will be faced “with pain of a magnitude that none of
us here can comprehend because it is beyond our experience.”
Jonas wonders if he has this courage.

The Chief Elder says that The Receiver must also have the
Capacity to See Beyond. Jonas looks out at the crowd, and
something happens to their faces—they change, the way an apple
he had tossed with his friend had changed. He thinks that maybe
he does have this quality.

That night, Jonas reads the rules and instructions for his
Assignment. The last rule—you may lie—frightens him. “What if
others—adults—had, upon becoming Twelves, received in their
instructions the same terrifying sentence?” Did others lie?

Jonas begins his training the next day. The Receiver tells Jonas,
“My job is to transmit to you all of the memories I have within
me. Memories of the past. . . . Memories of the whole world.”

24

Jonas is confused. “I thought there was only us. I thought there
was only now.” “There’s much more,” The Receiver tells him.
“There’s all that goes beyond—all that is Elsewhere—and all that
goes back, and back, and back.”

The current Receiver becomes The Giver and gives Jonas his ﬁrst
memory: that of a sled ride down a hill. When Jonas asks why
snow, sleds, and hills no longer exist, The Giver explains that
they became obsolete when the community decided to go to
Sameness.

The next day, Jonas notices his friend Fiona’s hair change, the
way the apple and the faces in the crowd at the Ceremony had
changed. Jonas asks The Giver about it. The Giver explains that
Jonas is starting to see the color red. Jonas learns that there
once were a lot of colors but that the community made the choice
to do away with them to go to Sameness.

As he continues his training, Jonas feels frustrated to realize how
few choices he has. He knows that it’s safer this way, but it
bothers him nonetheless.

Meanwhile, the newchild still isn’t sleeping well, so Jonas tries
taking him into his room at night. The ﬁrst time Gabe fusses,
Jonas rubs the baby’s back. As he does so, he remembers a
wonderful sail The Giver gave to him. The memory begins to fade,
and Jonas realizes he is giving the memory to the baby. It helps
Gabe sleep. Jonas does not tell The Giver that he has given away
a memory.

25

The Giver gives Jonas many happy memories, but increasingly
painful memories, too. Jonas begins to look at his family and
groupmates differently. They have never seen color. They have
never known pain. These thoughts make him feel very lonely. He
asks The Giver why everyone can’t have memories. “I think it
would seem a little easier if the memories were shared,” he says.

The Giver agrees. “But,” he says, “then everyone would be
burdened and pained. They don’t want that. And that’s the real
reason The Receiver is so vital to them, and so honored. They
selected me—and you—to lift that burden from themselves.”

The Giver tells him that when The Receiver-in-training failed ten
years ago, after only ﬁve weeks, the memories she had received
were released, and everyone had access to them. “It was chaos,”
he says.

Jonas wonders aloud what would happen to the community if
anything happened to him. He has been receiving memories for
nearly a year. “If they lost you, with all the training you’ve had
now, they’d have all those memories again themselves,” The Giver
says. “They wouldn’t know how to deal with it at all.”

“The only way I deal with it is by having you there to help me,”
Jonas says.

That gives The Giver an idea. “I suppose I could help the whole
community the way I’ve helped you,” he says. “It’s an interesting
concept. I need to think about it some more.”

26

Jonas then tells The Giver that his father was going to release a
newborn twin that morning. Jonas’s concept of release is that the
person is sent to Elsewhere. The Giver tells Jonas that he thinks
he should watch the video of that release.

Jonas watches on the video screen as his father inserts a needle
into a baby’s forehead. He listens to his father’s cheerful voice
say, “All done. That wasn’t so bad, was it?” He watches the baby
die. His mind reels. “He killed it! My father killed it!”

Jonas refuses to go home that night. The Giver says he can
spend the night with him. When Jonas rails against his father’s
actions, against all the people who perform releases, The Giver
tells him, “They can’t help it. They know nothing.” He explains
that feelings are not part of the life they’ve learned, that he and
Jonas are the only ones in the community who have feelings.

That evening, The Giver tells Jonas that “having you here with
me over the past year has made me realize that things must
change. . . . Now for the ﬁrst time I think there might be a way.”
And they make a plan for The Giver to help Jonas to escape, so
that the people will live with memories again.

Jonas wants The Giver to go with him, but his friend refuses.
He says he must stay to help the community deal with the
memories. “If you get away,” The Giver tells Jonas, “if you get
beyond, if you get to Elsewhere, it will mean that the community
has to bear the burden themselves, of the memories you had
been holding for them. I think they can, and that they will
acquire some wisdom. But it will be desperately hard for them.”

27

“Giver,” Jonas says. “You and I don’t need to care about the rest
of them.” But as soon as he says that, he is ashamed, because
“of course they needed to care. It was the meaning of everything.”

Jonas is sure the plan will work. But when he goes home, he
learns that the Committee has decided to release Gabe the next
morning. Jonas knows then that he has to ﬂee right away,
without The Giver’s help.

In the middle of the night Jonas straps Gabe into the child seat
on the back of his father’s bicycle. Then he pedals away from the
community, toward Elsewhere. Jonas’s only regret is that he
does not get to say good-bye to The Giver.

Jonas rides hard through the night, knowing that daylight will
bring knowledge of his and Gabe’s disappearance. At dawn he
stops in an isolated ﬁeld where he and Gabe eat and then sleep.

They go on like this for days, bicycling through the night,
sleeping during the day. Jonas’s greatest fear is the search
planes. Whenever he hears them, he holds Gabe and hides. 

One day the planes stop looking for them. The landscape
changes, too. It is no longer ﬂat and smooth. Now it is bumpy.
Jonas feels “simple moments of exquisite happiness” when he
sees wildﬂowers, birds, the wind shifting in the trees. But he is
also very afraid now, afraid that he and Gabe will starve. He
wonders brieﬂy if, ﬁnally given a choice to make, he made the
wrong one. Then, when he thinks of Gabe, he knows he had no
choice. He had to ﬂee.

28

Jonas and Gabe continue their journey, hungry and increasingly
cold. Jonas feels certain that he is reaching his destination. They
come to a place where it snows. He can no longer ride his bike.
And it is so hard to walk. Jonas thinks of just lying down with
the baby in the soft cold, of giving up. But he won’t. He tries to
call back some of the memories of warmth that The Giver had
given to him, but they are weak. Those memories are almost all
lost to him now, returned to the community.

Then, as he trudges up a snow-covered hill carrying the baby
inside his tunic, he feels he knows what is waiting for him at the
top. “We’re almost there, Gabriel,” he tells the baby. Somehow
Jonas knows that a sled will be waiting at the top of the hill, and
it is. Jonas climbs on and, holding tight to Gabriel, sets off down
the hill. He sees lights in the distance. And, for the ﬁrst time, he
hears people singing.

Thinking about the plot

• In what ways did Jonas’s world seem perfect?
• What were some of the things missing from Jonas’s world?
• What are some of the reasons that Jonas felt he had to run

away?

29

Setting/Time and Place: 
Where in the World Are We?

“ ‘I don’t know what you mean when you
say “the whole world” or “generations
before him.” I thought there was only
us. I thought there was only now.’” 

—Jonas, The Giver 

T he Giver is a science-ﬁction novel that takes place in a

“very different culture and time,” Lowry says. The author

establishes the book’s unusual setting in a number of ways.

One way Lowry establishes the book’s setting is by making
Jonas’s world one full of rules, some familiar, others totally
strange. There are rules about keeping feelings hidden, about
having more than two children—one male, one female—in each
family unit, and about bragging, among other things. There are
so many rules, in fact, that each household has the community’s
Book of Rules as one of the three books that it is allowed to—and
required to—own.

Lowry also places readers in unfamiliar territory with the words
she uses to describe things that are familiar to us. For instance,
a family becomes a family unit, a home becomes a dwelling, and
a stuffed animal becomes a comfort object.

30

In addition to making the familiar unfamiliar with her use of
words, Lowry uses capitalization to remove the reader from any
familiar time and place. The author capitalizes the names of
important events and ceremonies, such as the Naming, when
newchildren are given their names and the Ceremony of Twelve,
when children are given their lifetime work Assignments. Lowry
also capitalizes words that identify people’s positions in the
community. For instance, Jonas’s dad is a Nurturer, Jonas is a
Twelve, the man who trains him is The Receiver, then The Giver.

Another way Lowry establishes her unfamiliar setting is by giving
the reader a community in which people’s lives are mapped out
for them from birth to death. A baby is raised in the Nurturing
Center. At the December ceremony it is Named and delivered to
his or her new family unit. Each successive December that child
moves up to the next age group and assumes that group’s rights
and responsibilities. At the Ceremony of Twelve the child will be
assigned his or her lifelong job in the community. Eventually, an
adult may apply to receive a spouse. Then the Committee of
Elders monitors the couple for three years before allowing the
spouses to apply for children. Once their children are grown, the
spouses move into a group home, where they live with other
Childless Adults. Eventually, when they are old enough, they go
to live at the House of the Old, where they live out their ﬁnal
days, until they are released from the community.

Lowry also establishes the uniqueness—and eeriness—of her
setting by showing that there is no privacy. There is always
someone watching you, and someone listening to you. The reader
sees that Jonas is being watched when the boy recalls an

31

incident when he took an apple home from the recreation area
and, later, hears this public announcement: “ATTENTION. THIS IS

A REMINDER TO MALE ELEVENS THAT OBJECTS ARE NOT TO BE REMOVED
FROM THE RECREATION AREA AND THAT SNACKS ARE TO BE EATEN, NOT
HOARDED.” The speakers in each home are not just for public
announcements, they are for private listening. So when family
members are required to share feelings and dreams with one
another, they are also sharing them with whomever is listening in
at the other end of that speaker. The only person who can turn
off this speaker and listening device is The Receiver, or The Giver,
as Jonas comes to call him.

Jonas’s world is also a place that Lowry makes different by
making it all the same. The Giver tells Jonas that before the
community chose to go to Sameness there were hills, there was
snow, there were colors. Many of the differences we take for
granted in our world are missing from Jonas’s.

Lowry uses all of the above and more to turn a world that is
familiar—a world where children go to school, play catch, ride
bikes, get annoyed at little sisters, snuggle stuffed animals, and
coo at babies—into a world that is terribly strange.

Thinking about the setting

• Does The Giver take place anywhere that’s familiar to you?
• When does The Giver take place?
• What ﬁrst told you that The Giver takes place in a very different

culture and time?

32

Themes/Layers of Meaning: 
Is That What It Really Means?

“ ‘Giver,’ Jonas suggested, ‘you and I
don’t need to care about the rest of
them.’ 
“The Giver looked at him with a
questioning smile. Jonas hung his head.
Of course they needed to care. It was
the meaning of everything.”

—The Giver

Connections

The importance of making connections is one of the major
themes in The Giver. Lowry says that the book speaks to “the vital
need for humans to be aware of their interdependence, not only
with each other, but with the world and its environment.”

When Jonas begins his training, The Giver says that he must
transmit “the memories of the whole world” to Jonas. Because
The Giver has all these memories, his life is much richer than the
lives of other members of the community. He can see color, he
can hear music, he can feel love. But he can also feel pain, and
that is a great burden to him. When Jonas sees The Giver

33

suffering, he wants to help him. “What is it that makes you suffer
so much?” he asks. “If you gave some of it to me, maybe your
pain would be less.”

The Giver does give Jonas pain, and Jonas suffers from these
memories, but not as much as if he had to bear them alone. He is
glad that he can share them with The Giver, though he wishes
the memories could be shared by the whole community. The
Giver agrees. “The worst part of holding the memories is not the
pain. It’s the loneliness of it. Memories need to be shared.”

The Giver and Jonas work out a plan to return the memories to
the community. It means Jonas must leave and never come back.
Although Jonas is sad to leave The Giver, and initially wants his
friend to leave with him, he knows that The Giver must stay. He
needs to help the others. As Jonas realizes, “Of course they
needed to care. It was the meaning of everything.”

Lowry feels her connectedness to others even when she’s alone at
her desk writing. “When I’m working in isolation, I feel I have a
great bond with a world of people, of children, and adults who
care about things, who feel the same way about things. That’s
what Jonas didn’t have.”

Choice

Choice—which Jonas had very little of—is another important
theme in this book. Lowry says, “The Giver relates to me in
probably the same way it relates to everybody—it is a reminder of

34

the importance of the choices we make; also of the value of our
freedom to make choices.”

Jonas is made aware of the importance of choices we make when
he looks back at the choices the community has made. He sees
all that has been lost since the community decided to go to
Sameness: snow, hills, sleds, color, and choice.

He truly regrets the loss of choice. “If everything’s the same,” he
says, “then there aren’t any choices! I want to wake up in the
morning and decide things! A blue tunic, or a red one?”

Then The Giver points out that along with the freedom of choice
comes the possibility of making the wrong choices. Jonas
understands the community’s reasoning behind taking away
choice. He almost believes it. “We really have to protect people
from wrong choices,” he says. It’s “much safer.” But even as he
speaks these words, he feels uneasy with them.

Freedom versus security

Loss of choice is loss of freedom, and another important theme in
The Giver is freedom versus security. Lowry describes the perfect
world she created in the book: “I tried to make Jonas’s world
seem familiar, comfortable, and safe, and I tried to seduce the
reader. I seduced myself along the way. It did feel good, that
world. I got rid of all the things I fear and dislike: all the violence,
prejudice, poverty, and injustice; and I even threw in good
manners as a way of life because I liked the idea of it. . . . It was
very, very tempting to leave it at that. But I’ve never been a writer

35

of fairy tales. And if I’ve learned anything . . . it is that we can’t
live in a walled world, in an ‘only us, only now’ world, where we
are all the same and feel safe. We would have to sacriﬁce too
much.”

Jonas, in choosing to run away, comes to the same conclusion.
He knows that if he gets caught, “he would very likely be killed.
But,” he thinks, “what did that matter? If he stayed, his life was
no longer worth living.”

Even when he and Gabe are cold and starving, and Jonas
wonders if he made the right choice to run away, he can’t help
believing that he did. He knows that if he had stayed in the
community, he would not be starving. But, “if he had stayed, he
would have starved in other ways. He would have lived a life
hungry for feelings, for color, for love.”

Jonas was unwilling to give up all that. He was also unwilling to
sacriﬁce his humanity—his ability to care for others—for the
safety and security his community provided. He could not live in
a place that would kill a baby because he did not sleep through
the night.

Sameness versus diversity

One area where Jonas’s community ﬁnds security is in
Sameness, which leads to the theme of sameness versus
diversity. On this subject, Lowry says, “I think that people are
always more comfortable with familiar things. It is not easy to
stand out, and that’s why teenagers like to wear the same

36

sneakers as other teenagers. The world of The Giver is a world
where nobody has to take any risks. It’s a very safe and
comfortable world.”

So much is the same in Jonas’s world: He and his groupmates
wear the same kind of clothes, they ride the same kind of
bicycles, they have the same kind of family units. The streets are
ﬂat, the weather is unvarying, there is no color. Until he spends
time with The Giver, Jonas is unaware of this Sameness. Once he
learns of it, though, he is unhappy with it. He wants colors, he
wants snow and hills and sleds. When The Giver explains that
they had to let go of some things to gain control of others, Jonas
says, “We shouldn’t have!”

When Jonas runs away from his community, from Sameness, he
ﬁnds a world of unexpected pleasures: “After a life of Sameness
and predictability, he was awed by the surprises that lay beyond
each curve of the road.”

Individuality

In a community that values Sameness, there is no room for
individuality, which is another theme in The Giver. In Jonas’s
community, being your own person is frowned upon. The Chief
Elder says at the Ceremony of Twelve, “You Elevens have spent
all your years till now learning to ﬁt in, to standardize your
behavior, to curb any impulse that might set you apart from the
group.” It is only in their Assignments that their differences are
acknowledged and honored.

37

Children do not celebrate individual birthdays, they do not even
know their actual birthdays; instead, they turn the next age with
their groupmates at the December Ceremonies. When The Giver
gives Jonas the memory of a birthday party, “with one child
singled out and celebrated on his day,” Jonas comes to
understand “the joy of being an individual, special and unique
and proud.”

Honesty

Honesty is another theme in The Giver. When Jonas receives the
rules and instructions that he must follow in his training, he is
most disturbed by the ﬁnal rule, “You may lie.” He has been
trained since he was a very young child never to lie. When he
hears this, he wonders whether others, upon becoming Twelves,
have been told, “You may lie.” Do adults lie to him? He knows,
given his rules and instructions, that he could ask adults—his
parents, even—if they lie. “But,” he thinks, “he would have no
way of knowing if the answer he received were true.”

He learns that his father has lied to him when he watches the
tape of his father euthanizing the newborn twin. When talking
about the “release” the night before, Jonas had asked his father
about the procedure, had speciﬁcally asked if somebody else
came to get the baby, somebody from Elsewhere, and his father
had said yes, “That’s right, Jonas-bonus.” When Jonas sees that
his father actually kills the baby, he is horriﬁed. And he is angry.

38

“He lied to me,” Jonas cries. The Giver tries to console Jonas,
telling him that his father was just doing what he was told to do.
“He knows nothing,” he tells Jonas.

Jonas asks if The Giver lies to him, too. “I am empowered to lie,”
The Giver says. “But I have never lied to you.” The Giver has
made the choice to be honest.

Family

Another theme in this book is family. What makes a family? In
The Giver, families are called family units. They do not start with
a man and woman falling in love and deciding to start a family,
families start with a man or a woman applying for a spouse.
Then, once the committee matches them with one, the couple
must prove their compatability for three years before they are
allowed to apply for a child.

Children are not born in a family, they are born in a Birthing
Center by Birthmothers. They are raised in a Nurturing Center
until the December after their birth, at which time they are given
to parents the committee has chosen from among the applicants.
Each family unit is allowed one male and one female child.

When children are grown, the parents move out of the family
dwelling to live with other Childless Adults. They are no longer
part of their children’s lives. There is no intergenerational
connectedness. There are no grandparents.

39

Jonas does not miss grandparents, or know to miss them, until
The Giver gives him his favorite memory, which involves several
generations of people sitting around a Christmas tree opening
gifts. He tells The Giver, “I can see that it wasn’t a very practical
way to live, with the Old right there in the same place, where
maybe they wouldn’t be well taken care of, the way they are now,
and that we have a better-arranged way of doing things. But
anyway, I was thinking, I mean feeling, actually, that it was kind
of nice, then. And that I wish we could be that way, and that you
could be my grandparent.” Jonas sees—and wants—a family that
is bound not just by duty and obligation, but by love.

Thinking about the themes

• What do you think is the most important theme in The Giver?
• How much would you be willing to give up to live in a safe and

secure world? Would you give up as much as the people in
Jonas’s community?

• What are the good and bad things about Jonas’s family?

40

Characters: Who Are 
These People, Anyway?

T here are about ten speaking characters in this book. The

two main characters are Jonas and The Giver. Other

important characters are Gabriel, Jonas’s father, and Jonas’s
best friend, Asher.

Here is a list of characters. Following that, there is a brief
description of each of the main characters.

Jonas
The Giver
Gabriel
Father
Mother
Lily
Asher
Fiona
Larissa
Chief Elder

a boy turning twelve
the person who holds the memories of the world
a baby Jonas grows to love, called Gabe
Jonas’s father
Jonas’s mother
Jonas’s younger sister
Jonas’s best friend
Jonas’s friend
a woman in the House of the Old
the leader of the community

Jonas: Jonas, the main character in the book, is an eleven-
year-old boy on the verge of becoming an adult in his
community. Jonas is an introspective boy who thinks a good deal
about what is happening around him. He is also curious,
considerate, observant, intelligent, and brave.

41

From the beginning, it is clear that Jonas spends a lot of time
thinking. He struggles to ﬁnd just the right word to describe his
feelings regarding the upcoming Ceremony of Twelve. He wonders
about the apple that seemed to have changed while he was
playing catch with Asher. He thinks about dreams, replaying
them in his head. He tries to imagine how things might be
different for the whole community.

Jonas is also curious. He wants to experience everything, despite
the pain it might cause him. He wants to know about Elsewhere.
He asks his father and The Giver about release. He takes full
advantage of being able to ask The Giver questions.

That Jonas is very observant is especially obvious during and
after the Ceremony of Twelve. He notices the hush in the crowd
when the Chief Elder skips over him while making the
Assignments; he notices his groupmates trying not to make eye
contact; he notices the worried look on the face of his group
leader. And he notices how Asher and others seem to treat him
differently after he is given his Assignment.

Because he is so observant, Jonas can see when people are
uncomfortable or need help, and is considerate in offering it.
When he ﬁrst meets The Giver, and the man says of his
memories, “I am so weighted with them,” Jonas feels “a terrible
concern for the man.” And when The Giver is miserable with
pain, Jonas asks him to share it. “If you gave some of it to me,
maybe your pain would be less,” he says. And, just as he is
willing to take away the man’s greatest pain, he is unwilling to
take away his greatest pleasure. When The Giver offers to give

42

Jonas some music before he leaves, Jonas refuses. “No, Giver,”
he says. “I want you to keep that, to have with you, when I’m
gone.”

Jonas shows his intelligence in a number of ways. He realizes
that if his instructions tell him he can lie, the adults around him
may lie to him, and that he will never know if they do because
they do not have to answer him truthfully. After learning of
colors, and how they were done away with when the community
went to Sameness, Jonas says, “We shouldn’t have!” He even
shows his intelligence when he and Gabe run away: He uses
memories of snow to cool them off so they will avoid detection by
the search planes’ heat-seeking devices, and memories of warmth
to keep from freezing to death.

Finally, Jonas is brave. He does not feel brave when the Chief
Elder describes him as such at the Ceremony of Twelve, but he
goes on to show that he is very brave indeed. He is brave when he
volunteers to take painful memories from The Giver to ease his
burden. And he is brave when he runs away with Gabe. He risks
capture, and with it almost certain death, but he knows that he
has no choice. He has to run away to ﬁnd a real life for himself,
and he has to run away to let Gabe live his life.

The Giver: The Giver is another major character in this book.
He is the current Receiver of Memory, and he trains Jonas to be
his replacement. This man, one of the Elders in the community,
is old beyond his years. Holding the memories of the whole world,
alone, has worn him down. “This job has aged me,” he tells
Jonas. Through the course of the book, we see him as a
considerate, loving, wise, and kind man.

43

The Giver shows his consideration in the memories he gives
Jonas. He tries for a long while to avoid giving the boy painful
memories. When he ﬁnally realizes he must—that it is his job
and that he must lighten his burden—he feels awful. He cannot
look at Jonas after giving him the memory of war. “Forgive me,”
he says.

Jonas also learns the true meaning of love from The Giver, as he
is a very loving man. The Giver’s favorite memory, which he gives
to Jonas—of an extended family seated around a Christmas tree
exchanging gifts—is suffused with love. Later, when The Giver
tells Jonas about Rosemary, he reminds the boy of that memory.
He tells him that that was the feeling he had for Rosemary. “I
loved her,” he says. “I feel it for you, too.”

The Giver is also wise. He knows that the community pays far too
great a price for safety and security. “There are so many things I
could tell them,” The Giver tells Jonas about the Committee of
Elders. “I wish they would change. But they don’t want change.
Life here is so orderly, so predictable—so painless. It’s what
they’ve chosen.”

In his wisdom, and with Jonas’s help, The Giver ﬁnally realizes
that he must do something to bring about change. “Having you
here with me over the past year has made me realize that things
must change. For years I’ve felt they should, but it seemed so
hopeless. Now for the ﬁrst time I think there might be a way.”
And he works out a plan for Jonas to leave the community, thus
returning all the memories back to the people.

44

The Giver is also kind. He could run away with Jonas—the boy
repeatedly asks him to—but he refuses. He tells Jonas,
“Remember how I helped you in the beginning, when the
receiving of memories was new to you? . . . You needed me then.
And now they will.”

Gabriel: Gabriel is a baby that Jonas’s father brings home at
night for extra nurturing. He is small for his age and does not
sleep through the night, so the Committee has labeled him
Inadequate. If he does not grow and learn to sleep through the
night, the Committee will release him.

We know very little about Gabe: He has pale eyes, he is able to
receive memories, and he sleeps poorly. But he is still an
important character in the book. Through him, Jonas learns to
give as well as receive memories. Gabe, and his impending
release, force Jonas to run away early, taking the baby with him.
The baby also gives Jonas a reason for living, for continuing the
journey when he is starved and exhausted and almost without
hope. Gabe is “the one person left for him to love.” He is also
Jonas’s link with, and hope for, the future.

Father: Jonas’s father is another important character in The
Giver. He is quiet, thoughtful, and playful with babies and
children. He is the only adult in the story who we hear using
nicknames: He calls his daughter Lily-billy, his son Jonas-bonus.

His most important role in the book may be to help show Jonas
that all is not as it appears. Jonas’s father loves newchildren
and spends his days happily caring for them. Yet he releases—

45

kills—them when their presence would somehow disrupt the
community. He releases a newborn twin who might cause
confusion in the community. When Jonas watches his father
release the newborn, he sees the sacriﬁce his community makes
for orderliness; he sees the lies everyone—including his father—
must tell to make it all seem right. When Jonas learns that his
father has voted to release Gabriel, because the baby does not
sleep through the night, he knows he must run away and take
the baby with him.

Asher: Asher, another Eleven, is Jonas’s best friend. He has a
cheerful disposition and always talks too fast and mixes up
words. He is someone everyone enjoys, because he is fun and
makes a game out of everything. Once Jonas gets memories, he
realizes that he loves Asher. He also realizes that without
memories, Asher cannot love him back.

Thinking about the characters

• Who would you rather have for a friend, Jonas or Asher? Why?
• Do you think The Giver would be a good grandfather? Why or

why not?

• What does Gabe represent at the end of this book?
• How can Jonas’s father be so fond of children and still perform

releases?

46

Opinion: What Have Other 
People Thought About The Giver?

It’s a winner!

The Giver has won many awards, the most prestigious of which
is the 1994 Newbery Medal. This award is given annually to the
author of “the most distinguished contribution to American
literature for children” published the preceding year. The
selection is made by ﬁfteen librarians on the American Library
Association’s Newbery Committee. Look at your copy of The Giver
and you may see the award, printed in gold on the cover.

Lowry had previously won the 1990 Newbery Medal for her
historical novel Number the Stars. She remembers when the
time was approaching for the Newbery to be announced for
1994: “People were predicting that The Giver would win. I didn’t
want to be waiting by the phone. I went on a trip where no one
could reach me. I was in Antarctica when they made the
announcement.” When her publisher ﬁnally managed to reach
her by radioing her ship, Lowry was so excited that she turned to
the woman next to her and said, “You’ve probably never heard of
this, but I just won the Newbery Medal.” The woman had indeed
heard of the award—she was the former president of the
American Library Association!

47

Censored!

While The Giver is a popular book, it is also a controversial one. It
ranked number eleven on the American Library Association’s list
of most frequently challenged books of the 1990s. A challenged
book is one that a person or a group of people has tried to have
removed from library shelves.

Why has The Giver been challenged? Some people say the book is
too violent. They object to the passages regarding what is referred
to in the book as “release”: infanticide and euthanasia. Others
complain about references to Jonas’s “stirrings,” the natural
result of increased hormone production in the body. Parents with
such complaints have managed to get the book banned from
some school districts or to make it required that a student needs
a parent’s permission to read the book.

How does Lois Lowry feel about The Giver being such a frequently
challenged book? “I think it’s an honor I would prefer to forgo,”
she says. “It’s a difﬁcult situation.” Lowry worries about the
chilling effect such controversy can have on librarians and
teachers, and what it means regarding whether or not the book
will be read. “Even though they [librarians and teachers] may like
a book and want to teach the book, they don’t have time to deal
with the bureaucracy that’s required, and they’re likely to choose
a less controversial book.”

48

The end?

Probably the biggest complaint Lowry gets from children about
The Giver has to do with its ending.

“Many kids want a more speciﬁc ending to The Giver,” she says.
“Some write, or ask me when they see me, to spell it out exactly.
And I don’t do that . . . because The Giver is many things to many
different people. People bring to it their own complicated sense of
beliefs and hopes and dreams and all of that. I don’t want to put
my own feelings into it, my own beliefs, and ruin that for people
who create their own endings in their minds.”

Lowry says that the open-ended conclusion is the reason she
won’t write a sequel to this popular book. “In order to write a
sequel, I would have to say: This is how it ended. Here they are
and here’s what’s happening next. And that might be the wrong
ending for many, many people who chose something different.”

Thinking about what others think about The Giver

• Do you think that The Giver  seems like an award-winning
book? What other Newbery Medal–winning books have you
read? How does The Giver compare?

• How does the subject of censorship relate to the theme of The

Giver? What do you think the leaders in Jonas’s community
would say about censorship? What would Jonas and The 
Giver say?

• How do you imagine The Giver ends? Would you like to see the

ending more spelled out? Why or why not?

49

Glossary

Here are some important words used in The Giver.

Understanding these words will make it easier to read

the novel.

anguish a strong feeling of misery or distress

annex an extra building that is joined onto or placed near a

main building

apprehensive worried and slightly afraid

buoyancy the ability to keep aﬂoat

chastise to punish or criticize for wrongdoing

counsel advice

dejected sad and depressed

depth deepness

destination the place that a person or vehicle is traveling to

diminish to become smaller or weaker

disposition a person’s general mood 

exempted freed or excused from a certain duty or obligation

fugitives persons who are running away, especially from the

authorities

integrity being honest and fair

interdependence dependency on one another

meticulous very careful and precise

50

monitored kept watch over

nurturer a person who tends to the needs of someone,

especially a child

obsolete out-of-date and no longer used

ominous threatening; signaling trouble, danger, or disaster

petitioned made a formal request

phenomenon something very unusual and remarkable

precision accuracy or exactness

prestige honor or esteem

prohibited forbidden

regulated controlled or managed

relinquish to give up

restriction something that limits

rueful

full of regret, remorse, or sorrow

scrupulously with extreme care about details

solace comfort or relief from sorrow or grief

solemn very serious; grave

standardize to make the same as everyone or everything else

stirrings exciting, strong feelings

summit the highest point; the top

tentatively with uncertainty

transgression a violation of a law or duty

transmit to send or pass something from one person or place

to another

violation an act or instance of breaking a rule or law

yearning a strong wish for something

51

Lois Lowry on Writing

L ois Lowry delights in writing books for young people. “It’s

what I do best,” she says, “and it’s what I like doing best.”

She has written more than twenty-ﬁve books for children and
young adults and won numerous awards—including the
prestigious Newbery twice—for her work. How does she do it?

“It would be wonderful to be able to describe some ritualistic
approach to writing ﬁction,” Lowry says. “But the truth is so
much more mundane. I sit at my desk every day. . . . I type words
into my computer. I retype them, rearrange them, and delete
them, and retype them again and again. . . . Then I look at the
words I’ve written and rearrange them again. Eventually,
somehow, a story is put together. There isn’t anything magical.
It’s a lot of hard work, a lot of fun, and a lot of waiting for the
words.”

Though Lowry has to wait for the right words, she knows a good
deal about the book she’s going to write before she begins
writing. “Books start in my head long before I start them on my
computer,” she says. “Before I ever sit down to write a book, I
spend a lot of time going over it in my head.”

When Lowry begins a book, she has “the main characters, the
beginnings of the plot, and a sense of the theme. The secondary

52

characters and the complications of the plot all come to me after I
begin writing, and then I follow my imagination through the
pages of the book. Parts of it take me by surprise when I’m
writing.”

Sometimes it’s the endings that surprise her. “The characters
create the ending,” she says. “I only move the characters along
and tell what they do. The decisions they make determine what
the outcome will be.”

As for theme, Lowry says, “My books have varied in content and
style. Yet it seems to me that all of them deal, essentially, with
the same general theme: the importance of human connections.”

It takes Lowry about six months to write a book, and then a little
additional time for rewriting. Once she has ﬁnished the book and
reread it, she chooses a title. “I think a good title should be fairly
short, easy to remember, easy to say, and should tell something
about the book without revealing too much.”

Then she sends the manuscript to her publisher. They usually
ask for revisions, which, though Lowry might not like doing
them, she does, because she knows revisions make the book
better. Revisions usually take about a month, then the book is
complete.

By the time one book is published, Lowry is well into writing her
next one. Where does she get her ideas? “Ideas come from your
imagination,” Lowry says. “If you are a writer you are also an
observant person. . . . And when you observe something, your

53

imagination begins to play.” If you are observant, she says, you
will never run out of ideas. “I think ideas are there in the
millions. The hard part is choosing which idea to focus on.”

For aspiring writers

Lowry has two important pieces of advice for aspiring writers:
Read and write.

“Read a lot. I mean really a LOT,” Lowry says. “And when you’re
reading, think about how the author did things. How did the
author create a character who is interesting? . . . How did the
author create suspense?”

Lowry practices what she preaches. “Reading is the most
productive thing for me,” she says. “If I read brilliant paragraphs,
I want to rush out and write brilliant paragraphs. . . . Whatever
you read affects what you write.”

And it’s so important that you write. “I always tell children that
they should write letters to their grandparents, and they groan
when I say that,” Lowry says. “But I don’t mean it as a joke. The
best way to write ﬁction is to write it as if you’re telling a story to
a friend. Getting into the habit of writing letters to friends and
grandparents is a great way to practice writing ﬁction. The best
ﬁction has that kind of intimate quality to it. And, if you’re not in
the habit of writing with that warmth and intimacy, then your
ﬁction becomes stilted.”

54

You Be the Author!

• Character sketch: Lowry knows her main characters
intimately when she begins a book. She says that she knows
“how they dress, behave, talk, react.” You can get to know the
characters in your stories in the same way. Think of a story you
might like to write. Who are the main characters? Write a
character sketch for each, telling how the character dresses,
behaves in different situations, talks, and reacts to different
things. Does your character have a nickname? What are her
favorite—and least favorite—foods? What are his fears, likes, and
dislikes? Include in the character sketch everything you can
think of to help bring the character to life in your mind; this will
help you bring your character to life on the page.

• To be continued . . . : Lowry is known for writing ambiguous,
or unclear, endings to her books. She does this to allow “readers
to create their own answer” to how the story ends. How do you
think The Giver ends? What happens to Jonas and Gabe? What
happens in the community? Write a page—or more—telling how
you think the story ends.

• Keep a journal: When Lowry was young, she “endlessly
scribbled stories and poems in notebooks.” Do the same. Also,
keep track of what happens in your life and in the lives of those
around you, and how it makes you feel. You may use these notes,

55

and the memories they evoke, one day. “Everything a writer
experiences as a young person goes into the later writing in some
form,” Lowry says. “As writers all we have, really, is the memory
of our own past combined with observation.”

• Observe: Lowry says, “I think all writers are observers and so
everywhere I go I am absorbing the details of that place.” If you
want to write you also need to observe. Make a point of doing as
Lois Lowry does, and try to absorb the details of life around you.
If you need help remembering what you see (smell, hear, taste,
touch, and feel), keep a small notebook and pen with you and
write down your observations.

• Write a letter: Follow Lowry’s advice and become a better
ﬁction writer by writing letters to family and friends. The best
letters—like the best books—are those that tell great stories.
Writing down your real-life stories in a way that will interest
friends and relatives will make you a better storyteller when it
comes to writing ﬁction. It will also make you more popular with
friends and relatives, as everyone enjoys a good letter!

56

Activities

• Make a memory book: Memories are an important part of
The Giver because they are an important part of life. Make a
memory book to help record some of your important memories.
Use a loose-leaf notebook or a book of your own making;
whichever you use, be sure to allow room to add more memory
pages as additional memories come to you. Begin by making a
list of people, places, and events that have been important in
your life. Look at each item on the list and see what memory or
memories arise in your mind. Then, think of ways to record these
memories. You might write a poem, a sentence, a paragraph,
even a story; you might draw or paint a picture, or use a
photograph you already have. Transfer these memories to your
book, just as The Giver transfers memories to Jonas. Unlike The
Giver, however, you’ll still have the memories in your head; your
book will just be a way to help you remember them, as well as a
way for you to share your memories with others.

• Get a library card!: If you don’t already have a library card,
get one—and use it. Librarians will help you ﬁnd whatever kind of
book you’re looking for—funny, sad, scary—and even make some
good suggestions if you tell them what kinds of books you like.

• Picture this cover!: Lois Lowry is an accomplished
photographer as well as a wonderful writer; she took the two

57

photos on the cover of The Giver. If you have access to a camera,
take a photograph of your own that you think would be a good
cover for this book. Illustrate your cover if you don’t have a
camera. In either case, as you do your cover remember to think
about what you want to say with your image, what you want to
tell the reader about the book. Remember, too, that your goal
should be to make a person want to pick up the book and read it.

• Bike or hike: In Jonas’s community, the primary means of
transportation was bicycle. Only when the citizens visited other
communities, which was rare, did they travel by car or bus.
Think about how limited your range of movement would be if you
could only travel on foot or by bicycle. If possible, spend a day in
which you do not get in a car or on a bus or train. See if you can
get your family to go along with you in this experiment. At the
end of the day, talk about how your life would be different if you
always had such restrictions on how you could travel.

• Winning ways: Lois Lowry won the 1994 Newbery Medal for
The Giver. Read one or two other Newbery-winning books and
think about what it takes to be a winner. Some recent Newbery
Medal–winning books are:

A Single Shard by Linda Sue Park (2002)
A Year Down Yonder by Richard Peck (2001)
Bud, Not Buddy by Christopher Paul Curtis (2000)
Holes by Louis Sachar (1999)
Out of the Dust by Karen Hesse (1998)
The View from Saturday by E. L. Konigsburg (1997)
The Midwife’s Apprentice by Karen Cushman (1996)

58

Walk Two Moons by Sharon Creech (1995)
Missing May by Cynthia Rylant (1993)

• What’s in a name?: Names are very important in The Giver.
There is a great deal of thought put into naming each newchild.
Think about your name. Who chose it? Why was it given to you?
Does it have special meaning in your family? You might want to
look up its meaning in a book of names. Then, think about this:
If you could choose a different name for yourself, what would it
be? Why?

• Become a Receiver of Memory: Jonas was chosen to
become the Receiver of Memory in his community. You can
become a Receiver, too, simply by interviewing an elderly friend
or relative about his or her past. You might want to ﬁnd out what
it was like to be a child during previous generations. What games
did children play then? What did they wear? What did they eat?
What was school like? What kind of chores did they do? Did they
watch television? What about movies? What were the most
popular names? You might want to take notes or tape-record
your interview, so that later you can write it all down and share
these memories again with your “Giver.”

• Visit the “old”: While we don’t have a “House of the Old”
where all the elderly go, as Jonas does in his community, we do
have many nursing homes where a large number of elderly
people live. Many of these people are lonely and have few visitors.
You might like to ask an adult family member to arrange for you
to visit a nursing home, once, or on a regular basis. In addition

59

to bringing joy into other people’s lives, you might also hear some
wonderful memories from way back!

• What is love?: When Jonas asks his parents if they love him,
they tell him that it’s inappropriate to use a word like “love,” that
the word is “so meaningless that it’s become almost obsolete.”
Think of someone you love, and ﬁnd a way—a kind act, a poem,
a card—to show that you love them.

• Color my world: Research color and light. The Howard
Hughes Medical Institute has a Web site dedicated to the subject:
www.hhmi.org/senses/b110.html.

• Words, words, words: Precision of language is very
important in Jonas’s world. His best friend, Asher, has gotten
into trouble for repeatedly mixing up words, using distraught for
distracted, boyishness for buoyancy, smack for snack, and
expertness for expertise. Make a list of pairs of words that might
easily be confused. Then, play a game with friends or family
members in which you use the wrong word of the pair in a
sentence and you see if they can identify the incorrect word, then
think of the correct one.

• Don’t forget . . . : You can learn more about memory at the
Exploratorium’s online Memory Exhibition. The Web site is:
www.exploratorium.edu/memory/index.html.

60

Related Reading

Other novels by Lois Lowry
Autumn Street (1979)
Gathering Blue (2000)
Number the Stars (1989)
Rabble Starkey (1987)
Stay! Keeper’s Story (1997)
A Summer to Die (1977)
Taking Care of Terriﬁc (1983)
Us and Uncle Fraud (1984)

Series by Lois Lowry
Anastasia series (Anastasia Krupnik, Anastasia Again!)
Sam series (All About Sam, Attaboy, Sam!)
Caroline and P. J. Tate series (The One Hundredth Thing About

Caroline, Switcharound)

Autobiography by Lois Lowry
Looking Back (1998)

Science ﬁction and fantasy
Among the Hidden and Among the Imposters by Margaret

Peterson Haddix

Coraline by Neil Gaiman
The Hermit Thrush Sings by Susan Butler

61

The Moorchild by Eloise McGraw
Off the Road by Nina Bawden
The Phantom Tollbooth by Norton Juster
Tuck Everlasting by Natalie Babbitt
Under the Cat’s Eye by Gillian Rubinstein
The White Mountains trilogy by John Christopher
A Wrinkle in Time by Madeleine L’Engle

62

Bibliography

Books
Lowry, Lois. The Giver. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin Co., 1993.
Lowry, Lois. Looking Back. New York: Houghton Mifﬂin Co., 1998.

Newspapers and magazines
The Horn Book Magazine, July/August 1990, Volume 66, Issue 4,

pp. 412–424.

The Horn Book Magazine, July/August 1993, Volume 69, Issue 4,

p. 392.

The Horn Book Magazine, November/December 1993, Volume 69,

Issue 6, pp. 717–720.

The Horn Book Magazine, July/August 1994, Volume 70, Issue 4,

pp. 414–426.

The Reading Teacher, December 1994/January 1995, Volume 48,

Number 4, pp. 308–309.

Web sites
Bookpage interview with Lois Lowry:

wildes.home.mindspring.com/OUAL/int/lowrylois.html

BookSense interview with Lois Lowry:

www.booksense.com/people/archive/lowry.jsp

CNN online article, “Book Challenges Drop, but Librarians,

Writers, Remain Wary”:
www.cnn.com/2000/books/news/09/26/banned.books/

63

The Internet Public Library:

www.ipl.org/youth/AskAuthor/Lowry.html

Lois Lowry’s Web site:
www.loislowry.com

Random House, “A Message from the Author”:

www.randomhouse.com/teachers/authors/lowr.html

Scholastic, Lois Lowry biography and interview:

www2.scholastic.com/teachers/authorsandbooks/
authorstudies/authorstudies.jhtml

64

