 

THE WHEEL OF TIME 
by Robert Jordan 
The Eye of the World 
The Great Hunt The Dragon Reborn The Shadow Rising The Fires of Heaven 
Lord of Chaos A Crown of Swords The Path of Daggers 
Winter's Heart 
Crossroads of Twilight 
Knife of Dreams 
by Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson 
The Gathering Storm 

This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the authors' imaginations or 
are used fictitiously. 
THE GATHERING STORM 
Copyright © 2009 by The Bandersnatch Group, Inc. 
The phrases "The Wheel of Time
All rights reserved. 
Maps by Ellisa Mitchell 
Interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell 

-wheel symbol, are trademarks of Robert Jordan. 

 

A Tor Book 
Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC 
175 Fifth Avenue 
New York, NY 10010 
www.tor-forge.com 
Tor® is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Jordan, Robert, 1948-2007. 
The gathering storm / Robert Jordan and Brandon Sanderson.
p.        cm.
"Maps by Ellisa Mitchell; interior illustrations by Matthew C. Nielsen and Ellisa Mitchell." 
ISBN 978-0-7653-0230-4 (regular edition) ISBN 978-0-7653-2416-0 (limited edition) 
1. Rand al'Thor (Fictitious character) Fiction.        I.    Sanderson, Brandon.        II. Title. PS3560.O7617G38        2009 813'.54
2009035171 
First Edition: November 2009 Printed in the United States of America 0987654321 

(The Wheel of time ; 12) "A Tom Doherty Associates book." 

1st ed. 

dc22 

FOREWORD 

influenced, in large part, by how much I loved The 

In November 2007, I received a phone call that would change my life forever. Harriet McDougal, wife 
and editor of the late Robert Jordan, called to ask me if I would complete the last book of The Wheel of 
Time. 
For those who did not know Mr. Jordan had passed away, it pains me to be the one to break the news. I 
remember how I felt when while idly browsing the Internet on September 16, 2007
I discovered that 
he had died. I was shocked, stunned, and disheartened. This wonderful man, a hero to me in my writing 
career, was gone. The world suddenly became a different place. 
I first picked up The Eye of the World in 1990, when I was a teenage fantasy addict visiting my corner 
bookstore. I became a fan instantly and eagerly awaited The Great Hunt. Over the years, I've read the 
books numerous times, often re-reading the entire series when a new book was released. Time passed, and 
I decided I wanted to become a fantasy author
Wheel of Time. And yet, never did I think that I would one day get that phone call from Harriet. It came 
to me as a complete surprise. I had not asked, applied, or dared wish for this opportunity
though when 
the request was made, my answer was immediate. I love this series as I have loved none other, and the 
characters feel like old, dear friends from my childhood. 
I cannot replace Robert Jordan. Nobody could write this book as well as he could have. That is a simple 
fact. Fortunately, he left many notes, outlines, completed scenes, and dictated explanations with his wife 
and assistants. Before his passing, he asked Harriet to find someone to complete the series for his fans. He 
loved you all very much and spent the very last weeks of his life dictating events for the final volume. It 
was to be called A Memory of Light. 
Eighteen months later, we are here. Mr. Jordan promised that the final book would be big. But the 
manuscript soon grew prohibitively huge; it would be three times the size of a regular Wheel of Time 
book, and the decision was made by Harriet and Tor to split A Memory of Light into thirds. There were 
several excellent breaking points that would give a full and complete story in each third. You may think 
of The Gathering 
6                                                                                                                                                                FOREWORD 
Storm and its two followers as the three volumes of A Memory of Light or as the final three books of The 
Wheel of Time. Both are correct. 
As of this writing, I am halfway done with the second third. We are working as quickly as is reasonable, 
and we don't want you to have to wait too long to get the ending we were all promised nearly twenty 
years ago. (Mr. Jordan did write this ending himself before he passed away, and I have read it. And it is 
fantastic.) I have not tried to imitate Mr. Jordan's style. Instead, I've adapted my style to be appropriate to 
The Wheel of Time. My main goal was to stay true to the souls of the characters. The plot is, in large part, 
Robert Jordan's, though many of the words are mine. Imagine this book as the product of a new director 
working on some of the scenes of a movie while retaining the same actors and script. 
But this is a big project, and it will take time to complete. I beg your patience as we spend these next few 
years perfecting this story. We hold in our hands the ending of the greatest fantasy epic of our time, and I 

intend to see it done right. I intend to remain true to Mr. Jordan's wishes and notes. My artistic integrity, 
and love for the books, will not let me do anything less. In the end, I let the words herein stand as the best 
argument for what we are doing. 
This is not my book. It is Robert Jordan's book, and to a lesser extent, it is your book. 
Thank you for reading. 
BRANDON SANDERSON June 2009 
For Maria Simons and Alan Romanczuk, without whom this book wouldn't have been possible 

CONTENTS 

MAPS..................................12-13, 442 
PROLOGUE: What the Storm Means.................17 
1                Tears from Steel..................................49 
2                The Nature of Pain...............................64 
3                The Ways of Honor...............................81 
4                Nightfall.......................................92 
5                A Tale of Blood..................................97 
6                When Iron Melts................................112 
7                The Plan for Arad Doman.........................121 
8                Clean Shirts....................................136 
9                Leaving Maiden.................................155 
10                The Last of the Tabac.............................168 
11                The Death of Adrin..............................180 
12                Unexpected Encounters...........................191 
13                An Offer and a Departure.........................212 
14                A Box Opens...................................227 
15                A Place to Begin................................234 
16                In the White Tower..............................249 
17                Questions of Control.............................275 
18                A Message in Haste..............................285 
19                Gambits......................................294 
20                On a Broken Road...............................311 
21                Embers and Ash................................325 
22                The Last That Could Be Done......................338 
23                A Warp in the Air...............................357 
io                                                                                                                                                      CONTENTS 
24                A New Commitment.............................362 
25                In Darkness....................................378 
26                A Crack in the Stone.............................385 
27                The Tipsy Gelding..............................400 
28                Night in Hinderstap.............................420 
29                Into Bandar Eban...............................443 
30                Old Advice....................................457 
31                  A Promise to Lews Therin.........................468 
32                Rivers of Shadow................................489 
33                A Conversation with the Dragon....................512 
34                Legends.......................................522 
35                A Halo of Blackness.............................536 
36                The Death of Tuon..............................550 

37                A Force of Light................................562 
38                News in Tel'aran'rhiod . . :.........................581 
39                A Visit from Verin Sedai..........................598 
40                The Tower Shakes...............................618 
41                  A Fount of Power...............................634 
42                  Before the Stone of Tear...........................654 
43                  Sealed to the Flame..............................664 
44                Scents Unknown................................684 
45                  The Tower Stands...............................702 
46                To Be Forged Again..............................714 
47                  The One He Lost................................728 
48                  Reading the Commentary..........................741 
49                Just Another Man...............................749 
50                Veins of Gold...................................755 
EPILOGUE: Bathed in Light......................761 
GLOSSARY...................................767 
Ravens and crows. Rats. Mists and clouds. Insects and corruption. Strange events and odd occurrences. 
The ordinary twisted and strange. Wonders! 
The dead are beginning to walk, and some see them. Others do not, but more and more, we all fear the 
night. 
These have been our days. They rain upon us beneath a dead sky, crushing us with their fury, until as one 
we beg: "Let it begin!" 

Journal of the Unknown Scholar, entry for The Feast of Freia, 1000 NE 

PROLOGUE 

 

What the Storm Means 
Renald Fanwar sat on his porch, warming the sturdy blackoak chair crafted for him by his grandson two 
years before. He stared northward. 
At the black and silver clouds. 
He'd never seen their like before. They blanketed the entire horizon to the north, high in the sky. They 
weren't gray. They were black and silver. Dark, rumbling thunderheads, as dark as a root cellar at 
midnight. With striking silver light breaking between them, flashes of lightning that gave off no sound. 
The air was thick. Thick with the scents of dust and dirt. Of dried leaves and rain that refused to fall. 
Spring had come. And yet his crops didn't grow. Not a sprout had dared poke through the earth. 
He rose slowly from his chair, wood creaking, chair rocking softly behind him, and walked up to the edge 
of the porch. He chewed on his pipe, though its fire had gone out. He couldn't be bothered to relight it. 
Those clouds transfixed him. They were so black. Like the smoke of a brushfire, only no brushfire smoke 
ever rose that high up in the air. And what to make of silver clouds? Bulging between the black ones, like 
places where polished steel shone through metal crusted with soot. 
He rubbed his chin, glancing down at his yard. A small, whitewashed fence contained a patch of grass and 
shrubs. The shrubs were dead now, 
17 
18                                                                                      THE      GATHERING      STORM 
every one of them. Hadn't lasted through that winter. He'd need to pull them out soon. And the grass . . . 

dry grass, dry shingles, dry seed. 

perhaps on his property. He itched to go inspect the 

well, the grass was still just winter thatch. Not even any weeds sprouted. 
A clap of thunder shook him. Pure, sharp, like an enormous crash of metal against metal. It rattled the 
windows of the house, shook the porch boards, seemed to vibrate his very bones. 
He jumped back. That strike had been close
damage. Lightning fire could destroy a man, burn him out of his land. Up here in the Borderlands, so 
many things were unintentional tinder
But the clouds were still distant. That strike couldn't have been on his property. The silver and black 
thunderheads rolled and boiled, feeding and consuming themselves. 
He closed his eyes, calming himself, taking a deep breath. Had he imagined the thunder? Was he going 
off the side, as Gaffin always joked? He opened his eyes. 
And the clouds were right there, directly above his house. 
It was as if they had suddenly rolled forward, intending to strike while his gaze was averted. They 
dominated the sky now, sweeping distantly in either direction, massive and overwhelming. He could 
almost feel their weight pressing the air down around him. He drew in a breath that was heavy with 
sudden humidity, and his brow prickled with sweat. 
Those clouds churned, dark black and silver thunderheads shaking with white blasts. They suddenly 
boiled downward, like the funnel cloud of a twister, coming for him. He cried out, raising a hand, as a 
man might before a powerfully bright light. That blackness. That endless, suffocating blackness. It would 
take him. He knew. 
And then the clouds were gone. 
His pipe hit the porch's floorboards, clicking softly, tossing burned tabac out in a spray across the steps. 
He hadn't realized he'd let it slip free. Renald hesitated, looking up at empty blue sky, realizing that he 
was cringing at nothing. 
The clouds were off on the horizon again, some forty leagues distant. They thundered softly. 
He picked up his pipe with a shaking hand, spotted from age, tanned from years spent in the sun. Just a 
trick of your mind, Renald, he told himself. You're going off the side, sure as eggs is eggs. 
He was on edge because of the crops. That had him on edge. Though he spoke optimistic words for the 
lads, it just wasn't natural. Something 
WHAT      THE      STORM      MEANS                                                                            19 
should have sprouted by now. He'd farmed that land for forty years! Barley didn't take this long to sprout. 
Burn him, but it didn't. What was going on in the world these days? Plants couldn't be depended on to 
sprout, and clouds didn't stay where they should. 
He forced himself to sit back down in his chair, legs shaking. Getting old, I am. ...    he thought. 
He'd worked a farm all of his life. Farmsteading in the Borderlands was not easy, but if you worked hard, 
you could grow a successful life while you grew strong crops. "A man has as much luck as he has seeds 
in the field," his father had always said. 
Well, Renald was one of the most successful farmers in the area. He'd done well enough to buy out the 
two farms beside his, and he could run thirty wagons to market each fall. He now had six good men 
working for him, plowing the fields, riding the fences. Not that he didn't have to climb down in the muck 
every day and show them what good farming was all about. You couldn't let a little success ruin you. 
Yes, he'd worked the land, lived the land, as his father always used to say. He understood the weather as 
well as a man could. Those clouds weren't natural. They rumbled softly, like an animal growling on a 
dark night. Waiting. Lurking in the nearby woods. 
He jumped at another crash of thunder that seemed too close. Were those clouds forty leagues away? Is 
that what he'd thought? Looked more like ten leagues away, now that he studied them. 
"Don't get like that," he grumbled at himself. His own voice sounded good to him. Real. It was nice to 
hear something other than that rumbling and the occasional creak of shutters in the wind. Shouldn't he be 
able to hear Auaine inside, getting supper ready? 
"You're tired. That's it. Tired." He fished in his vest pocket and pulled out his tabac pouch. 
A faint rumbling came from the right. At first, he assumed it was the thunder. However, this rumbling 
was too grating, too regular. That wasn't thunder. It was wheels turning. 

Sure enough, a large, oxen-drawn wagon crested Mallard's Hill, just to the east. Renald had named that 
hill himself. Every good hill needed a name. The road was Mallard's Road. So why not name the hill that 
too? 
He leaned forward in his chair, pointedly ignoring those clouds as he squinted toward the wagon, trying to 
make out the driver's face. Thulin? The smith? What was he doing, driving a wagon laden halfway to the 
heavens? He was supposed to be working on Renald's new plow! 
20                                                                                      THE      GATHERING      STORM 
Lean for one of his trade, Thulin was still twice as muscled as most farmhands. He had the dark hair and 
tan skin of a Shienaran, and kept his face shaved after their fashion, but he did not wear the topknot. 
Thulin's family might trace its roots back to Borderland warriors, but he himself was just a simple country 
man like the rest of them. He ran the smithy over in Oak Water, five miles to the east. Renald had enjoyed 
many a game of stones with the smith during winter evenings. 
Thulin was getting on he hadn't seen as many years as Renald, but the last few winters had prompted 
Thulin to start speaking of retirement. Smithing wasn't an old man's trade. Of course, neither was farming. 
Were there really any old man's trades? 
Thulin's wagon approached along the packed earthen road, approaching Renald's white-fenced yard. Now, 
that's odd, Renald thought. Behind the wagon trailed a neat string of animals: five goats and two 
milkcows. Crates of black-feathered chickens were tied on the outside of the wagon, and the bed of the 
wagon itself was piled full of furniture, sacks and barrels. Thulin's youthful daughter, Mirala, sat on the 
seat with him, next to his wife, a golden-haired woman from the south. Twenty-five years Thulin's wife, 
but Renald still thought of Gallanha as "that southern girl." 
The whole family was in the wagon, leading their best livestock. Obviously on the move. But where? Off 
to visit relatives, perhaps? He and Thulin hadn't played a round of stones in ... oh, three weeks now. Not 
much time for visiting, what with the coming of spring and the hurried planting. Someone would need to 
mend the plows and sharpen the scythes. Who would do it if Thulin's smithy went cold? 
Renald tucked a pinch of tabac into his pipe as Thulin pulled the wagon up beside Renald's yard. The 
lean, gray-haired smith handed the reins to his daughter, then climbed down from the wagon, feet 
throwing puffs of dust into the air when he hit the ground. Behind him the distant storm still brewed. 
Thulin pushed open the fence gate, then strode up to the porch. He looked distracted. Renald opened his 
mouth to give greeting, but Thulin spoke first. 
"I buried my best anvil in Gallanha's old strawberry patch, Renald," the big smith said. "You remember 
where that is, don't you? I packed my best set of tools there as well. They're well greased and inside my 
best chest, lined to keep it dry. That should keep the rust off of them. For a time at least." 
Renald closed his mouth, holding his pipe half-full. If Thulin was 
WHAT      THE      STORM      MEANS                                                                            21 
burying his anvil . . . well, it meant he wasn't planning to come back for a while. "Thulin, what
"If I don't return," Thulin said, glancing northward, "would you dig my things out and see that they're 
cared for? Sell them to someone who cares, Renald. I wouldn't have just anyone beating that anvil. Took 
me twenty years to gather those tools, you know." 
"But Thulin!" Renald sputtered. "Where are you going?" 
Thulin turned back to him, leaning one arm on the porch railing, those brown eyes of his solemn. "There's 
a storm coming," he said. "And so I figure I've got to head on to the north." 
"Storm?" Renald asked. "That one on the horizon, you mean? Thulin, it looks bad
does
"Not like this, old friend," Thulin said. "This ain't the sort of storm you ignore." 
"Thulin?" Renald asked. "What are you talking about?" 
Before he could answer, Gallanha called from the wagon box. "Did you tell him about the pots?" 
"Ah," Thulin said. "Gallanha polished up that set of copper-bottom pots that your wife always liked. 
They're sitting on the kitchen table, waiting for Auaine, if she wants to go claim them." With that, Thulin 
nodded to Renald and began to walk back toward the wagon. 
Renald sat, stupefied. Thulin always had been a blunt one; he favored saying his mind, then moving on. 

but there's no use running from it. We've had bad storms before." 

burn my bones, but it 

" 

That was part of what Renald liked about him. But the smith could also pass through a conversation like a 
boulder rolling through a flock of sheep, leaving everyone dazed. 
Renald scrambled up, leaving his pipe on the chair and following Thulin down into the yard and to the 
wagon. Burn it, Renald thought, glancing to the sides, noticing the brown grass and dead shrubs again. 
He'd worked hard on that yard. 
The smith was checking on the chicken crates tied to the sides of his vehicle. Renald caught up to him, 
reaching out a hand, but Gallanha distracted him. 
"Here, Renald," she said from the wagon box. "Take these." She held out a basket of eggs, one lock of 
golden hair straying from her bun. Renald reached over to take the basket. "Give these to Auaine. I know 
you're short on chickens on account of those foxes last fall." 
Renald took the basket of eggs. Some were white, some were brown. "Yes, but where are you going, 
Gallanha?" 
22                                                                                      THE      GATHERING      STORM 
"North, my friend," Thulin said. He walked past, laying a hand on Renald's shoulder. "There will be an 
army gathering, I figure. They'll need smiths." 
"Please," Renald said, gesturing with the basket of eggs. "At least take a few minutes. Auaine just put 
some bread in, one of those thick honey loaves that you like. We can discuss this over a game of stones." 
Thulin hesitated. 
"We'd better be on the move," Gallanha said softly. "That storm is coming." 
Thulin nodded, then climbed up into the wagon. "You might want to come north too, Renald. If you do, 
bring everything you can." He paused. "You're good enough with the tools you have here to do some 
small metalwork, so take your best scythes and turn them into polearms. Your two best scythes; now don't 
go skimping around with anything that's a second best or a third best. Get your best, because it's the 
weapon you're going to use." 
Renald frowned. "How do you know that there will be an army? Thulin, burn me, I'm no soldier!" 
Thulin continued as if he hadn't heard the comments. "With a polearm you can pull somebody off of a 
horse and stab them. And, as I think about it, maybe you can take the third best and make yourself a 
couple of swords." 
"What do I know about making a sword? Or about using a sword, for that matter?" 
"You can learn," Thulin said, turning north. "Everyone will be needed, Renald. Everyone. They're coming 
for us." He glanced back at Renald. "A sword really isn't all that tough to make. You take a scythe blade 
and straighten it out, then you find yourself a piece of wood to act as a guard, to keep the enemy's blade 
from sliding down and cutting your hand. Mostly you'll just be using things that you've already got." 
Renald blinked. He stopped asking questions, but he couldn't stop thinking them. They bunched up inside 
his brain like cattle all trying to force their way through a single gate. 
"Bring all your stock, Renald," Thulin said. "You'll eat them or your men will eat them and you'll 
want the milk. And if you don't, then there'll be men you can trade with for beef or mutton. Food will be 
scarce, what with everything spoiling so much and the winter stores having run low. Bring everything 
you've got. Dried beans, dried fruit, everything." 
WHAT      THE      STORM      MEANS                                                                            23 
Renald leaned back against the gate to his yard. He felt weak and limp. Finally, he forced out just one 
question. "Why?" 
Thulin hesitated, then stepped away from the wagon, laying a hand on Renald's shoulder again. "I'm sorry 
to be so abrupt. I ... well, you know how I am with words, Renald. I don't know what that storm is. But I 
know what it means. I've never held a sword, but my father fought in the Aiel War. I'm a Borderlander. 
And that storm means the end is coming, Renald. We need to be there when it arrives." He stopped, then 
turned and looked to the north, watching those building clouds as a farmhand might watch a poisonous 
snake he found in the middle of the field. "Light preserve us, my friend. We need to be there." 
And with that, he removed his hand and climbed back into the wagon. Renald watched them ease off, 
nudging the oxen into motion, heading north. Renald watched for a long time, feeling numb. 
The distant thunder cracked, like the sound of a whip, smacking against the hills. 

The door to the farmhouse opened and shut. Auaine came out to him, gray hair in a bun. It had been that 
color for years now; she'd grayed early, and Renald had always been fond of the color. Silver, more than 
gray. Like the clouds. 
"Was that Thulin?" Auaine asked, watching the distant wagon throw up dust. A single black chicken 
feather blew across the roadway. 
"Yes." 
"And he didn't stay, even to chat?" 
Renald shook his head. 
"Oh, but Gallanha sent eggs!" She took the basket and began to transfer the eggs into her apron to carry 
them inside. "She's such a dear. Leave the basket there on the ground; I'm sure she'll send someone for it." 
Renald just stared northward. 
"Renald?" Auaine asked. "What's gotten into you, you old stump?" 
"She polished up her pots for you," he said. "The ones with the copper bottoms. They're sitting on her 
kitchen table. They're yours if you want them." 
Auaine fell silent. Then he heard a sharp sound of cracking, and he looked over his shoulder. She had let 
her apron grow slack, and the eggs were slipping free, plopping to the ground and cracking. 
In a very calm voice, Auaine asked, "Did she say anything else?" 
He scratched his head, which hadn't much hair left to speak of. "She 
24                                                                                      THE      GATHERING      STORM 
said the storm was coming and they had to head north. Thulin said we should go too." 
They stood for another moment. Auaine pulled up the edge of her apron, preserving the majority of the 
eggs. She didn't spare a glance for those that had fallen. She was just staring northward. 
Renald turned. The storm had jumped forward again. And it seemed to have grown darker somehow. 
"I think we ought to listen to them, Renald," Auaine said. "I'll . . . I'll go fix up what we'll need to bring 
with us from the house. You can go around back and gather the men. Did they say how long we'll be 
gone?" 
"No," he said. "They didn't even really say why. Just that we need to go north for the storm. And . . . that 
this is the end." 
Auaine inhaled sharply. "Well, you just get the men ready. I'll take care of the house." 
She bustled inside, and Renald forced himself to turn away from the storm. He rounded the house and 
entered the barnyard, calling the farmhands together. They were a stout lot, good men, all of them. His 
own sons had sought their fortunes elsewhere, but his six workers were nearly as close to him as sons. 
Merk, Favidan, Rinnin, Veshir and Adamad gathered round. Still feeling dazed, Renald sent two to gather 
up the animals, two more to pack what grain and provisions they had left from the winter and the final 
man off to fetch Geleni, who had gone into the village for some new seed, just in case the planting had 
gone bad on account of their stores. 
The five men scattered. Renald stood in the farmyard for a moment, then went into the barn to fetch his 
lightweight forge and pull it out into the sunlight. It wasn't just an anvil, but a full, compact forge, made 
for moving. He had it on rollers; you couldn't work a forge in a barn. All that dust could take fire. He 
heaved the handles, wheeling it out to the alcove set off to the side of the yard, built from good bricks, 
where he could do minor repairs when he needed to. 
An hour later, he had the fire stoked. He wasn't as skilled as Thulin, but he'd learned from his father that 
being able to handle a little of your own forgework made a big difference. Sometimes, you couldn't 
squander the hours it would take to go to town and back just to fix a broken hinge. 
The clouds were still there. He tried not to look at them as he left the forge and headed into the barn. 
Those clouds were like eyes, peeping over his shoulder. 
Inside the barn, light sprinkled down through cracks in the wall, 
WHAT      THE      STORM      MEANS                                                                            25 
falling on dust and hay. He'd built the structure himself some twenty-five years back. He kept planning to 
replace some of those warped roofing planks, but now there wouldn't be time. 
At the tool wall, he reached for his third-best scythe, but stopped. Taking a deep breath, he took the best 

eldest of his farmhands

 approached, pulling a pair of goats. 

scythe off the wall instead. He walked back out to the forge and knocked the haft off the scythe. 
As he tossed the wood aside, Veshir
When Veshir saw the scythe blade on the forge, his expression grew dark. He tied the goats to a post, then 
trotted over to Renald, but said nothing. 
How to make a polearm? Thulin had said they were good for yanking a man off his horse. Well, he would 
have to replace the snath with a longer straight shaft of ashwood. The flanged end of the shaft would 
extend beyond the heel of the blade, shaped into a crude spearpoint and clad with a piece of tin for 
strength. And then he would have to heat the blade and bang off the toe about halfway, making a hook 
that could tug a man off his horse and maybe cut him at the same time. He slid the blade into the burning 
coals to heat it, then began to tie on his apron. 
Veshir stood there for a minute or so, watching. Finally, he stepped up, taking Renald by the arm. 
"Renald, what are we doing?" 
Renald shook his arm free. "We're going north. The storm is coming and we're going north." 
"We're going north for just a storm? It's insanity!" 
It was nearly the same thing Renald had said to Thulin. Distant thunder sounded. 
Thulin was right. The crops . . . the skies . . . the food going bad without warning. Even before he'd 
spoken to Thulin, Renald had known. Deep within, he'd known. This storm would not pass overhead then 
vanish. It had to be confronted. 
"Veshir," Renald said, turning back to his work, "you've been a hand on this farm for . . . what, fifteen 
years now? You're the first man I hired. How well have I treated you and yours?" 
"You've done me well," Veshir said. "But burn me, Renald, you've never decided to leave the farm 
before! These crops, they'll wither to dust if we leave them. This ain't no southerner wetfarm. How can we 
just go off?" 
"Because," Renald said, "if we don't leave, then it won't matter if we planted or not." 
Veshir frowned. 
id                                                                                    THE      GATHERING      STORM 
"Son," Renald said, "you'll do as I say, and that's all we'll have of it. Go finish gathering the stock." 
Veshir stalked away, but he did as he was told. He was a good man, if hotheaded. 
Renald pulled the blade out of the heat, the metal glowing white. He laid it against the small anvil and 
began to beat on the knobby section where heel met beard, flattening it. The sound of his hammer on the 
metal seemed louder than it should have been. It rang like the pealing thunder, and the sounds blended. 
As if each beat of his hammer was itself a piece of the storm. 
As he worked, the peals seemed to form words. Like somebody muttering in the back of his head. The 
same phrase over and over. 
The storm is coming. The storm is coming. . . . 
He kept on pounding, keeping the edge on the scythe, but straightening the blade and making a hook at 
the end. He still didn't know why. But it didn't matter. 
The storm was coming and he had to be ready. 
Watching the bowlegged soldiers tie Tanera's blanket-wrapped body across a saddle, Falendre fought the 
desire to begin weeping again, the desire to vomit. She was senior, and had to maintain some composure 
if she expected the four other surviving sul'dam to do so. She tried to tell herself she had seen worse, 
battles where more than a single sul'dam had died, more than one damane. That brought her too near 
thinking of exactly how Tanera and her Miri met their deaths, though, and her mind shied from it. 
Huddling by her side, Nenci whimpered as Falendre stroked the damane's head and tried to send soothing 
feelings through the a'dam. That often seemed to work, but not so well today. Her own emotions were too 
roiled. If only she could forget that the damane was shielded, and by whom. By what. Nenci whimpered 
again. 
"You will deliver the message as I directed you?" a man said behind her. 
No, not just any man. The sound of his voice stirred the pool of acid in her belly. She made herself turn to 
face him, made herself meet those cold, hard eyes. They changed with the angle of his head, now blue, 
now gray, but always like polished gemstones. She had known many hard men, but had she ever known 

one hard enough to lose a hand and mo- 
WHAT      THE      STORM      MEANS                                                                            27 
ments later take it as if he had lost a glove? She bowed formally, twitching the a'dam so that Nenci did 
the same. So far they had been treated well for prisoners under the circumstances, even to being given 
washwater, and supposedly they would not remain prisoners much longer. Yet with this man, who could 
say what might make that change? The promise of freedom might be part of some scheme. 
"I will deliver your message with the care it requires," she began, then stumbled over her tongue. What 
honorific did she use for him? "My Lord Dragon," she finished hurriedly. The words dried her tongue, but 
he nodded, so it must have sufficed. 
One of the marath'damane appeared through that impossible hole in the air, a young woman with her hair 
in a long braid. She wore enough jewelry for one of the Blood, and of all things, a red dot in the middle of 
her forehead. "How long do you mean to stay here, Rand?" she demanded as if the hard-eyed young man 
were a servant rather than who he was. "How close to Ebou Dar are we here? The place is full of 
Seanchan, you know, and they probably fly raken all around it." 
"Did Cadsuane send you to ask that?" he said, and her cheeks colored faintly. "Not much longer, 
Nynaeve. A few minutes." 
The young woman shifted her gaze to the other sul'dam and damane, all taking their lead from Falendre, 
pretending there were no marath'damane watching them, and especially no men in black coats. The 
others had straightened themselves as best they could. Surya had washed the blood from her face, and 
from her Tabi's face, and Malian had tied large compresses on them that made them appear to be wearing 
odd hats. Ciar had managed to clean off most of the vomit she had spilled down the front of her dress. 
"I still think I should Heal them," Nynaeve said abruptly. "Hits to the head can cause odd things that don't 
come on right away." 
Surya, her face hardening, moved Tabi behind her as if to protect the damane. As if she could. Tabi's pale 
eyes had widened in horror. 
Falendre raised a pleading hand toward the tall young man. Toward the Dragon Reborn, it seemed. 
"Please. They will receive medical aid as soon as we reach Ebou Dar." 
"Give over, Nynaeve," the young man said. "If they don't want Healing, they don't want it." The 
marath'damane scowled at him, gripping her braid so hard that her knuckles turned white. He turned his 
own attention back to Falendre. "The road to Ebou Dar lies about an hour east of here. You can reach the 
city by nightfall if you press. The shields on the 
28                                                                                      THE      GATHERING      STORM 
damane will evaporate in about half an hour. Is that right for the saidar-woven shields, Nynaeve?" The 
woman scowled at him in silence. "Is that right, Nynaeve?" 
"Half an hour," she replied finally. "But none of this is right, Rand al'Thor. Sending those damane back. It 
isn't right, and you know it." 
For a moment, his eyes were even colder. Not harder. That would have been impossible. But for that long 
moment, they seemed to hold caverns of ice. "Right was easy to find when all I had to care for was a few 
sheep," he said quietly. "Nowadays, sometimes it's harder to come by." Turning away, he raised his voice. 
"Logain, get everyone back through the gateway. Yes, yes, Merise. I'm not trying to command you. If 
you'll deign to join us, though? It will be closing soon." 
Marath'damane, the ones who called themselves Aes Sedai, began filing through that mad opening in the 
air, as did the black-coated men, the Asha'man, all mingling with the hook-nosed soldiers. Several of 
those finished tying Tanera to the saddle of the horse. The beasts had been provided by the Dragon 
Reborn. How odd, that he should give them gifts after what had happened. 
The hard-eyed young man turned back to her. "Repeat your instructions." 
"I am to return to Ebou Dar with a message for our leaders there." 
"The Daughter of the Nine Moons," the Dragon Reborn said sternly. "You will deliver my message to 
her." 
Falendre stumbled. She was not in any way worthy to speak to one of the Blood, let alone the High Lady, 
daughter of the Empress, might she live forever! But this man's expression allowed no argument. Falendre 

